---
permalink: /
title: "Scott Olesen"
excerpt: "About me"
author_profile: true
redirect_from:
  - /about/
  - /about.html
---

I am Scientific Director at [OpenBiome](http://www.openbiome.org), a non-profit
stool bank based in Boston. OpenBiome provides material for fecal microbiota
transplantation (FMT) for use in treating *C. difficile* infection and for
research purposes. My key research interests are antimicrobial resistance and
microbiome science.

## Background

I did my postdoctoral training with [Yonatan
Grad](https://www.hsph.harvard.edu/yonatan-grad/) at the Harvard Chan School of
Public Health, where I focused on antimicrobial resistance, and my PhD with
[Eric Alm](http://almlab.mit.edu/) at MIT, where I worked in environmental
microbiology, human microbiome science, and clinical trial design.

At MIT, I was a founding member of MIT's [Biological Engineering Communciation
Lab](http://bewritinglab.mit.edu/), where I co-led the development of the first
[CommKit](http://mitcommlab.mit.edu/be/), a guide to communication tasks
designed by scientists for scientists. I was also a founding member of the MIT
[Biological Engineering REFS](http://berefs.com/), a peer-to-peer conflict
management and mentoring program, and a Diversity Chair on the department's
graduate student board.  During my postdoc I served as the President of the
[Harvard Chan Postdoc Association](http://hsph.me/pda) and served on the School's
Committee for Diversity and Inclusion.

## Other interests

I am in the midst of yet again revamping my website. If there were blog posts
or material on my previous site that you liked, let me know and I'll be sure
they make it back here!

I'm interested in how to optimally deliver technical information. I like the
idea of using [rules for games](/games) as a test case, but this is far from
optimized.

I produced [this list](https://github.com/swo/modern-greek-flashcards) of
Modern Greek vocabulary that might be useful to learners.
