---
title: 'Dr. Kevin Schoenholzer: Quantitative educational researcher'
permalink: /
author_profile: yes
output:
  html_document:
    df_print: paged
editor_options:
  markdown:
    wrap: 72
redirect_from:
- /about/
- /about.html
---

![](images/KS2024.jpg){width="5cm"}

I am currently a PhD candidate at the Jacobs Center for Productive Youth
Development, working on a Swiss National Science Foundation project:
"Understanding Social Gradients in Education". I obtained my Master's
degree in Political Science and Economic History from the University of
Zurich, where I completed my thesis on "The Impact of Rising Income
Inequality on Turnout in Switzerland 1995 - 2015". My current study,
"Welfare State Policy and Educational Inequality", in peer review,
examines how policies like public early childhood education, parental
leave, and family benefits can influence educational outcomes across
social strata. We analyze international student data to understand the
correlation between parental education and children's academic
achievements. Concurrently, I investigate the impact of educational
expansion on the belief that education should determine future earnings.
This research utilizes international survey data to examine shifts in
public opinion and educational attainment.

I will conduct a 6-month research stay at the University of Toronto,
collaborating on a new study "Structural Social Changes and Educational
Mobility". We seek to explore how educational expansion and changes in
social origin affect educational mobility, using harmonized data from
seven of the worlds longest running household panels. Research Interest:
My research interests include social inequality, government policy,
citizen beliefs/attitudes, and statistical modeling using large scale
cross-sectional or longitudinal data from multiple countries.

[My academic
CV](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1I-HdKuXZ7pop_bE_uyc-74T5RZukQ5Yp/view?usp=drive_link){.uri}
*(link/[pdf])*
