---
title: Wastewater for equitable Covid-19 monitoring
date: 2021-07-08
permalink: /posts/2021/7/wastewater-for-equitable-covid-19-monitoring
tags:
---

*Cross-posted from [Biobot's blog](https://biobotanalytics.medium.com/wastewater-for-equitable-covid-19-monitoring-e3b947d91e0a)*

Systemic inequities in our healthcare system have led Covid-19 to take a
disproportionate toll on different groups of Americans, notably different races
and ethnicities. Can wastewater-based monitoring of Covid-19 help promote
health equity?

Wastewater-based monitoring serves everyone connected to a sewer system. This
means that, if a wastewater monitoring program includes wastewater treatment
plants that serve a representative population, then the monitoring program
automatically serves a representative population.

In contrast, an equitable monitoring system based on clinical testing requires
not only placing testing sites in the right places, but also that a
representative population seeks testing. In other words, even if a testing site
is located near a group of people, there is no guarantee those people will be
served by that site. The same holds true for vaccination: even if a vaccination
site is near people that *could* benefit from the site, there is no guarantee
that they *will* benefit.

To visualize wastewater-based monitoringâ€™s equitability, we compared [the
demographics](https://data.census.gov/cedsci/table?q=demographics&tid=ACSDP1Y2019.DP05)
of the US population against the demographics of the approximately 200 counties
served by wastewater treatment plants currently participating in the US
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) [national wastewater monitoring
project](https://biobotanalytics.medium.com/biobot-launches-national-wastewater-monitoring-project-2968a5997af).
We also compared the demographics of the counties served by the wastewater
monitoring program against [the
demographics](https://data.cdc.gov/Vaccinations/COVID-19-Vaccination-Demographics-in-the-United-St/km4m-vcsb)
of people who have been fully vaccinated.

![](/files/images/2021-07-equitable-age.png)

We found that wastewater monitoring better represents the age structure of the
US, compared to the vaccinated population. Younger people are underrepresented
among the vaccinated population, while older people are overrepresented.
Prioritizing access to vaccines for people at greater risk of severe Covid-19,
such as older adults, helped prevent the most deaths and hospitalizations.
However, all age groups can spread the virus, so it is important for disease
surveillance to have an even representation across age groups, which wastewater
monitoring can provide.

![](/files/images/2021-07-equitable-race.png)

Wastewater monitoring also more equitably represents Black and Hispanic
Americans, who are [disproportionately
affected](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/community/health-equity/racial-ethnic-disparities/index.html)
by Covid-19 and are vaccinated at lower rates than white Americans. For
example, while 12% of the US population is Black, only 8% of the vaccinated
population is. Among counties served by the HHS project, however, 12% of
residents are Black. Similarly, Hispanics make up 19% of the US population and
23% of the population served by the HHS project but only 15% of the vaccinated
population.

Native American populations, too small to be easily seen on a bar chart, are an
important part of the HHS project. Nine tribal lands spread over six different
states are participating in the project. Native Americans make up 0.8% of the
US population and 0.6% of the population served by the project.

Overall, wastewater-based monitoring is an important tool for tracking
Covid-19, and the US government's investment in a national monitoring program
is an exciting step for this new, equitable way of tracking disease.
