---
title: Using wastewater to estimate real-world vaccine effectiveness
date: 2021-08-27
permalink: /posts/2021/8/using-wastewater-to-estimate-real-world-vaccine-effectiveness
tags:
---

*Cross-posted from [Biobot's blog](https://biobotanalytics.medium.com/using-wastewater-to-estimate-real-world-vaccine-effectiveness-134172bc5f76)*

In an epidemic, better knowledge can lead to wiser policy and can save lives.
Can wastewater-based measurements of SARS-CoV-2 activity help us understand the
effects of Covid-19 vaccination, and how those effects
[might](https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/wr/mm7034e3.htm)
[change](https://www.nytimes.com/article/covid-breakthrough-delta-variant.html)
with new variants like Delta?

To understand how wastewater can help us better understand the role of vaccines
during this Delta wave, we should first look back to how we originally came to
understand the Covid-19 vaccines’ effects on disease transmission.

## Early on, it wasn’t clear if vaccines prevented disease transmission via asymptomatic carriers

Vaccines for Covid-19 were developed in record time, thanks to [a combination
of](https://www.healthline.com/health-news/heres-how-it-was-possible-to-develop-covid-19-vaccines-so-quickly#Hard-work-and-luck-played-a-part)
decades of pre-existing research, expedited review processes, and an abundance
of qualifying clinical trial participants. Clinical trials showed that the
Pfizer, Moderna, and J&J vaccines dramatically reduced vaccinated people's risk
of hospitalization and death. This has made vaccines an incredibly important
part of the Covid-19 response.

But when the first vaccine data was released, epidemiologists had a further
question: do the vaccines also prevent *asymptomatic* infections? A
[substantial
fraction](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/hcp/planning-scenarios.html),
something like one-third to two-thirds, of Covid-19 infections are
asymptomatic, and these asymptomatic infections play an [important
role](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33410879/) in Covid-19 transmission. If a
vaccine prevents severe Covid-19, it will blunt the effects of the spreading
virus. But if a vaccine also prevents asymptomatic infections, then mass
vaccination can also slow the spread of the virus itself.

While the clinical trials showed that the vaccines protects against
hospitalization and death, they were not designed to test whether vaccinated
individuals could still become asymptomatic carriers of the virus. If
vaccinated individuals still got infected with the virus but did not experience
any symptoms, and thus were asymptomatic carriers, then they could still act as
silent spreaders of the virus. Knowing whether or not the vaccines prevented
asymptomatic virus carriage, in addition to preventing death or
hospitalization, was of critical importance for predicting how vaccines would
change how Covid-19 spreads.

## Large ad hoc studies were needed to study how vaccines affect asymptomatic infection

Now, we are confident that Covid-19 vaccination also prevents asymptomatic
infection in addition to outcomes like hospitalization. However, this knowledge
was not easy to come by. The [current
confusion](https://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2021/08/why-pandemic-so-bad-florida/619761/)
about how effective the vaccines are against the Delta variant only emphasizes
how hard it is to measure this aspect of vaccine efficacy.

To investigate how vaccines protect against asymptomatic infection, a clinical
trial must follow vaccinated and unvaccinated people and check whether fewer of
the vaccinated people develop symptomatic Covid-19. When a participant in the
trial gets sick, it triggers a chain of events: the participant gets a Covid-19
test, and if the test is positive, the test result is logged in the trial’s
database.

By contrast, to determine if vaccines also prevent asymptomatic carriage of the
virus, a research study needs to test asymptomatic people, both vaccinated and
unvaccinated. In this kind of study, there is no “trigger” for testing;
participants must be regularly tested even if they have no symptoms. For
example, some
[studies](https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/science/science-briefs/fully-vaccinated-people.html)
compiled the results from tests on healthcare workers at a few large medical
centers who were routinely screened for Covid-19, regardless of their
vaccination status or whether they had any symptoms. These studies are useful
and important for understanding the effect of vaccination on asymptomatic
carriage, but they require compiling testing records from thousands or tens of
thousands of people.

## Can wastewater be an independent measure of vaccine’s effectiveness against asymptomatic carriage?

Researchers [have suggested](https://jamanetwork.com/journals/jama-health-forum/fullarticle/2775225) that wastewater-based epidemiology could be used to
inform the distribution of vaccines. Could wastewater measurements of
SARS-CoV-2 also have provided information on whether vaccines are effective
against asymptomatic carriage of the virus early on?

New research suggests that a measurement called the [wastewater-case
ratio](https://www.medrxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.06.10.21258580v1), or WC
ratio, might help provide this information. The WC ratio ---the wastewater
concentration of SARS-CoV-2 virus divided by the number of reported Covid-19
cases--- correlates with testing availability: when it is hard to get a Covid-19
test, such as early in the pandemic, the number of confirmed cases was low
relative to the number of people who were actually infected. Because
wastewater, roughly speaking, measures the number of infected people regardless
of whether they seek a test, the WC ratio is high when testing is scarce, and
it is low when testing is abundant.

Vaccination should also affect the WC ratio, but in a way that depends on the
effects of vaccination. For example, if vaccination prevents symptomatic
disease but not asymptomatic carriage, the WC ratio would not change: for every
reported case, mostly representing symptomatic individuals, there would be no
change in the relative number of asymptomatic carriers. But if vaccination
prevents asymptomatic carriage, then the WC ratio could potentially fall: for
every reported case, there would be fewer asymptomatic shedders. In other
words, if the ratio of asymptomatic carriers to symptomatic infected people
changes with vaccination, then the WC ratio might also change with vaccination
rates.

![](/files/images/2021-08-vaccination-bars.png)

There are other possibilities. For example, imagine that vaccination prevented
symptomatic infection by "downgrading" symptomatic infected to asymptomatic
ones. In this scenario, vaccination would prevent symptomatic cases but not
ongoing transmission of the virus. There would be the same number of total
infections, but more asymptomatic infections for every symptomatic infection,
such that the WC ratio would rise with increasing vaccination rates.

In reality, vaccination downgrades some symptomatic infections to asymptomatic
carriage *and also* prevents many people from becoming asymptomatic carriers. In
this situation, increasing vaccination rates could lead to proportionally fewer
asymptomatic infections compared to symptomatic infection rates, so the
wastewater-case ratio would actually *fall* with increasing vaccination rates.

## During a future epidemic, wastewater-based epidemiology could provide clues about vaccine effectiveness

Many questions remain unanswered. What can the WC ratio tell us,
quantitatively, about vaccine effectiveness? How many samples, across how many
locations, over what time scale would be required? How soon after vaccination
programs began could conclusions about vaccine effectiveness be derived from
wastewater data?

Nevertheless, in an epidemic, good data saves lives. As wastewater monitoring
becomes better integrated into our public health surveillance systems, and as
research into wastewater-based epidemiology advances, we may be able to more
quickly gather life-saving information, like about the effects of vaccination,
using wastewater.
